data/blog/archlinux-on-matebook-x-pro-2021.mdx, before:

---
title: Arch Linux on Huawei Matebook X Pro 2021
date: '2022-09-11'
tags: 
 - archlinux
 - guide
draft: false
lang: 'en'
summary: 'In this article I will describe how I set up a mirror for Arch Linux'
authors: ['default']
---
## Introduction

Installing Arch linux with GPT, dm-crypt, LUKS, LVM and systemd-boot.
I cannot recommend to use the archlinux installer until it is currently too buggy to make a nice disk setup with encryption.

<TOCInline toc={props.toc} exclude="Overview" toHeading={3} />

## USB media

Create a bootable USB stick:

```bash
dd if=~/Downloads/archlinux.iso of=/dev/sdx status=progress
```

## Boot into USB stick

### Wifi
Configure Wifi with `ìwd`

I used to the following command to connect to my AP:
```bash
iwd
[iwd]# station <dev> connect <SSID>
```
### Disk setup
Part your disk using gdisk, use a GPT partition layout. It is a dual boot with a Windows 10 (`/dev/nvme0n1p{1,2,3}` are Windows partitions)

We need two partiotions, one for the boot partition and one for the encrypted LVM partition (`/` and `/home` and for swap)
I use 120 MB for /boot (`/dev/nvme0n1p5`) and the rest of the free space for the second partition (`/dev/nvme0n1p6`)

```bash
fdisk -l
```
```text {14-15} showLineNumbers
Disk /dev/nvme0n1: 476.94 GiB, 512110190592 bytes, 1000215216 sectors
Disk model: KPART512GBC2DVT                         
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: 878C49A4-61B1-459B-A6DA-925729098BBC

Device             Start        End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/nvme0n1p1      2048     206847    204800   100M EFI System
/dev/nvme0n1p2    206848     239615     32768    16M Microsoft reserved
/dev/nvme0n1p3    239616  203532287 203292672  96.9G Microsoft basic data
/dev/nvme0n1p4 203532288  204799999   1267712   619M Windows recovery environment
/dev/nvme0n1p5 204800000  205045759    245760   120M EFI System
/dev/nvme0n1p6 205045760 1000214527 795168768 379.2G unknown
```

### LUKS/LVM setup
```bash
cryptsetup -v luksFormat /dev/nvme0n1p6
cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/nvme0n1p6 luks
```
```bash
pvcreate /dev/mapper/luks
vgcreate vg00 /dev/mapper/luks
lvcreate -L 4G vg00 -n swap
lvcreate -l 40G vg00 -n root
lvcreate -l +100%FREE vg00 -n home
```
### Format /boot, /, /home partitions + swap
```bash
mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/vg00-root
mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/vg00-home

mount /dev/mapper/vg00-root /mnt
mount /dev/mapper/vg00-home /mnt/home

mkswap /dev/mapper/vg00-swap
swapon /dev/mapper/vg00-swap

mkfs.vfat -F32 /dev/nvme0n1p5
mkdir /mnt/boot
mount /dev/nvme0n1p5 /mnt/boot
```
## Base system setup
```bash
pacstrap /mnt base base-devel linux linux-firmware sudo zsh sudo networkmanager
```
## Create /etc/fstab
```bash
genfstab -pU /mnt >> /mnt/etc/fstab
```
```bash
cat /mnt/etc/fstab
```
```
# Static information about the filesystems.
# See fstab(5) for details.

# <file system> <dir> <type> <options> <dump> <pass>

# UUID=df14e7e7-a944-4d7a-817b-24a1fb5c1fc1
/dev/mapper/vg0-root    /               ext4            rw,relatime     0 1

# UUID=e7560a43-c721-4016-bec1-00f9dcd6face
/dev/mapper/vg0-home    /home           ext4            rw,relatime     0 2

# UUID=43A4-190D
/dev/nvme0n1p5          /boot           vfat            rw,relatime,fmask=0022,dmask=0022,codepage=437,iocharset=ascii,shortname=mixed,utf8,errors=remount-ro   0 2

# UUID=586c161a-0afe-4843-9f47-2a23fc97740a
/dev/mapper/vg0-swap    none            swap            defaults        0 0
```
You may use `noattime` instead of `relatime` if you use SSD

## Chrooting into new system
### Preparation
```bash
arch-chroot /mnt
timedatectl set-ntp true
timedatectl set-timezone Europe/Berlin
hostnamectl set-hostname matebook

# Root pw
passwd

# User setup ("bh")
useradd -m -G wheel -s /usr/bin/zsh bh
passwd bh

# Locales
echo LANG=en_US.UTF-8 > /etc/locale.conf
locale-gen
```
### Adjust /etc/mkinitcpio.conf
```
[...]
# The order of the hooks is very important
HOOKS="base udev autodetect modconf block keymap encrypt lvm2 resume filesystems keyboard fsck"
```
### Install and setup bootloader
```bash
bootctl --path=/boot install
```
Create `/boot/loader/entries/archlinux.conf`
```
title	Arch Linux
linux	/vmlinuz-linux
initrd	/initramfs-linux.img
options cryptdevice=UUID=<PARTUUID>:lvm:allow-discards resume=/dev/mapper/vg00-swap root=/dev/mapper/vg00-root rw quiet splash
```
Replace `<PARTUUID>` with the UUID of root partition: `df14e7e7-a944-4d7a-817b-24a1fb5c1fc1`

Edit `/boot/loader/loader.conf`
```
timeout 5
default archlinux
editor 0
# HiDPI stuff
console-mode max
```
### Post Setup
```bash
mkinitcpio -p linux
```
## Leave chroot and reboot
```bash
exit
umount -R /mnt
reboot
```

## Post Install
Some packages I hat to install:
### Video
- `yay -S xf86-video-intel`

For [hardware acceleration](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Hardware_video_acceleration)
- `yay -S libvdpau-va-gl`
- `yay -S intel-media-driver`

Adjust `/etc/environment`:
```
LIBVA_DRIVER_NAME=iHD
VDPAU_DRIVER=va_gl
```
### Sound
- `yay -S sof-firmware`

### CPU
For the latest [microcode](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Microcode) updates
- `yay -S intel-ucode`

Adjust `/boot/loader/entries/arch.conf`:
```text {2} showLineNumbers
[...]
initrd /intel-ucode.img
initrd /initramfs-linux.img
[...]
```
### SSD
[Don't](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Specialties#Discard/TRIM_support_for_solid_state_drives_(SSD)) use `discard` in `/etc/fstab`.

Instead use:
```bash
sudo systemctl enable fstrim.timer
sudo systemctl start fstrim.timer
```

### Fingerprint reader
Currently [not supported](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/libfprint/wiki/-/wikis/Unsupported%20Devices)
```bash
lsusb
```
```text {3} showLineNumbers
Bus 004 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0003 Linux Foundation 3.0 root hub
Bus 003 Device 003: ID 05c8:03f1 Cheng Uei Precision Industry Co., Ltd (Foxlink) HD Camera
Bus 003 Device 002: ID 27c6:5125 Shenzhen Goodix Technology Co.,Ltd. Goodix Fingerprint Device 
Bus 003 Device 004: ID 8087:0026 Intel Corp. AX201 Bluetooth
Bus 003 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0002 Linux Foundation 2.0 root hub
Bus 002 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0003 Linux Foundation 3.0 root hub
Bus 001 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0002 Linux Foundation 2.0 root hub
````

Commit message:

Fix slug of blog article

data/blog/archlinux-on-matebook-x-pro-2021.mdx, after:

---
title: Arch Linux on Huawei Matebook X Pro 2021
date: '2022-09-11'
tags: 
 - archlinux
 - guide
draft: false
lang: 'en'
summary: 'Hot to install Arch Linux on a Huawei Matebook X Pro 2021'
authors: ['default']
---
## Introduction

Installing Arch linux with GPT, dm-crypt, LUKS, LVM and systemd-boot.
I cannot recommend to use the archlinux installer until it is currently too buggy to make a nice disk setup with encryption.

<TOCInline toc={props.toc} exclude="Overview" toHeading={3} />

## USB media

Create a bootable USB stick:

```bash
dd if=~/Downloads/archlinux.iso of=/dev/sdx status=progress
```

## Boot into USB stick

### Wifi
Configure Wifi with `ìwd`

I used to the following command to connect to my AP:
```bash
iwd
[iwd]# station <dev> connect <SSID>
```
### Disk setup
Part your disk using gdisk, use a GPT partition layout. It is a dual boot with a Windows 10 (`/dev/nvme0n1p{1,2,3}` are Windows partitions)

We need two partiotions, one for the boot partition and one for the encrypted LVM partition (`/` and `/home` and for swap)
I use 120 MB for /boot (`/dev/nvme0n1p5`) and the rest of the free space for the second partition (`/dev/nvme0n1p6`)

```bash
fdisk -l
```
```text {14-15} showLineNumbers
Disk /dev/nvme0n1: 476.94 GiB, 512110190592 bytes, 1000215216 sectors
Disk model: KPART512GBC2DVT                         
Units: sectors of 1 * 512 = 512 bytes
Sector size (logical/physical): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
I/O size (minimum/optimal): 512 bytes / 512 bytes
Disklabel type: gpt
Disk identifier: 878C49A4-61B1-459B-A6DA-925729098BBC

Device             Start        End   Sectors   Size Type
/dev/nvme0n1p1      2048     206847    204800   100M EFI System
/dev/nvme0n1p2    206848     239615     32768    16M Microsoft reserved
/dev/nvme0n1p3    239616  203532287 203292672  96.9G Microsoft basic data
/dev/nvme0n1p4 203532288  204799999   1267712   619M Windows recovery environment
/dev/nvme0n1p5 204800000  205045759    245760   120M EFI System
/dev/nvme0n1p6 205045760 1000214527 795168768 379.2G unknown
```

### LUKS/LVM setup
```bash
cryptsetup -v luksFormat /dev/nvme0n1p6
cryptsetup luksOpen /dev/nvme0n1p6 luks
```
```bash
pvcreate /dev/mapper/luks
vgcreate vg00 /dev/mapper/luks
lvcreate -L 4G vg00 -n swap
lvcreate -l 40G vg00 -n root
lvcreate -l +100%FREE vg00 -n home
```
### Format /boot, /, /home partitions + swap
```bash
mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/vg00-root
mkfs.ext4 /dev/mapper/vg00-home

mount /dev/mapper/vg00-root /mnt
mount /dev/mapper/vg00-home /mnt/home

mkswap /dev/mapper/vg00-swap
swapon /dev/mapper/vg00-swap

mkfs.vfat -F32 /dev/nvme0n1p5
mkdir /mnt/boot
mount /dev/nvme0n1p5 /mnt/boot
```
## Base system setup
```bash
pacstrap /mnt base base-devel linux linux-firmware sudo zsh sudo networkmanager
```
## Create /etc/fstab
```bash
genfstab -pU /mnt >> /mnt/etc/fstab
```
```bash
cat /mnt/etc/fstab
```
```
# Static information about the filesystems.
# See fstab(5) for details.

# <file system> <dir> <type> <options> <dump> <pass>

# UUID=df14e7e7-a944-4d7a-817b-24a1fb5c1fc1
/dev/mapper/vg0-root    /               ext4            rw,relatime     0 1

# UUID=e7560a43-c721-4016-bec1-00f9dcd6face
/dev/mapper/vg0-home    /home           ext4            rw,relatime     0 2

# UUID=43A4-190D
/dev/nvme0n1p5          /boot           vfat            rw,relatime,fmask=0022,dmask=0022,codepage=437,iocharset=ascii,shortname=mixed,utf8,errors=remount-ro   0 2

# UUID=586c161a-0afe-4843-9f47-2a23fc97740a
/dev/mapper/vg0-swap    none            swap            defaults        0 0
```
You may use `noattime` instead of `relatime` if you use SSD

## Chrooting into new system
### Preparation
```bash
arch-chroot /mnt
timedatectl set-ntp true
timedatectl set-timezone Europe/Berlin
hostnamectl set-hostname matebook

# Root pw
passwd

# User setup ("bh")
useradd -m -G wheel -s /usr/bin/zsh bh
passwd bh

# Locales
echo LANG=en_US.UTF-8 > /etc/locale.conf
locale-gen
```
### Adjust /etc/mkinitcpio.conf
```
[...]
# The order of the hooks is very important
HOOKS="base udev autodetect modconf block keymap encrypt lvm2 resume filesystems keyboard fsck"
```
### Install and setup bootloader
```bash
bootctl --path=/boot install
```
Create `/boot/loader/entries/archlinux.conf`
```
title	Arch Linux
linux	/vmlinuz-linux
initrd	/initramfs-linux.img
options cryptdevice=UUID=<PARTUUID>:lvm:allow-discards resume=/dev/mapper/vg00-swap root=/dev/mapper/vg00-root rw quiet splash
```
Replace `<PARTUUID>` with the UUID of root partition: `df14e7e7-a944-4d7a-817b-24a1fb5c1fc1`

Edit `/boot/loader/loader.conf`
```
timeout 5
default archlinux
editor 0
# HiDPI stuff
console-mode max
```
### Post Setup
```bash
mkinitcpio -p linux
```
## Leave chroot and reboot
```bash
exit
umount -R /mnt
reboot
```

## Post Install
Some packages I hat to install:
### Video
- `yay -S xf86-video-intel`

For [hardware acceleration](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Hardware_video_acceleration)
- `yay -S libvdpau-va-gl`
- `yay -S intel-media-driver`

Adjust `/etc/environment`:
```
LIBVA_DRIVER_NAME=iHD
VDPAU_DRIVER=va_gl
```
### Sound
- `yay -S sof-firmware`

### CPU
For the latest [microcode](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Microcode) updates
- `yay -S intel-ucode`

Adjust `/boot/loader/entries/arch.conf`:
```text {2} showLineNumbers
[...]
initrd /intel-ucode.img
initrd /initramfs-linux.img
[...]
```
### SSD
[Don't](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Dm-crypt/Specialties#Discard/TRIM_support_for_solid_state_drives_(SSD)) use `discard` in `/etc/fstab`.

Instead use:
```bash
sudo systemctl enable fstrim.timer
sudo systemctl start fstrim.timer
```

### Fingerprint reader
Currently [not supported](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/libfprint/wiki/-/wikis/Unsupported%20Devices)
```bash
lsusb
```
```text {3} showLineNumbers
Bus 004 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0003 Linux Foundation 3.0 root hub
Bus 003 Device 003: ID 05c8:03f1 Cheng Uei Precision Industry Co., Ltd (Foxlink) HD Camera
Bus 003 Device 002: ID 27c6:5125 Shenzhen Goodix Technology Co.,Ltd. Goodix Fingerprint Device 
Bus 003 Device 004: ID 8087:0026 Intel Corp. AX201 Bluetooth
Bus 003 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0002 Linux Foundation 2.0 root hub
Bus 002 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0003 Linux Foundation 3.0 root hub
Bus 001 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0002 Linux Foundation 2.0 root hub
````
